doc: Added features of nRF54H20 doc (#14948)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/device_guides/working_with_nrf/nrf54h/features_nrf54h20.rst

:orphan:

.. features_nrf54h20:

Features of the nRF54H20 DK
###########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

The nRF54H20 System-on-Chip (SoC) is the first wireless SoC in the nRF54H Series from Nordic Semiconductor.
It is an ideal solution for 2.4 GHz wireless applications that have the highest requirements for performance, energy efficiency, security, and ease of use, enabling you to incorporate innovative features hard to productize today.
nRF54H20 includes a multiprotocol radio, supporting Bluetooth Low Energy and IEEE 802.15.4-based protocols.

High performance and low power
==============================

The nRF54H20 SoC has been designed to provide high compute performance in your application, while maintaining or improving the battery life compared to previous devices.

> It achieves this by integrating two Arm® Cortex®-M33 processors clocked up to 320 MHz, 2 MB of MRAM as non-volatile memory, 1 MB of RAM, a 10 dBm TX power multiprotocol radio, and state-of-the-art security features, in an asymmetric multi-core system, in which the different CPUs are optimized for various types of workloads.

Reviewer: The list looks good, though I'd simplify the first sentence (line 21) to say: 

It uses an asymmetric multi-core system that optimizes different cores for various tasks by integrating the following:

This configuration allows the SoC to achieve a lower power consumption and better performance compared to the usage of identical CPUs.
nRF54H20 uses MRAM as non-volatile memory.
Compared to flash memory, MRAM is more energy efficient and can be written to up to 86x faster.

> Compared to earlier devices, external interfaces have also been improved to support significantly higher data rates (up to 40 times greater for USB and up to 8 times greater for external memory).

Reviewer: Not sure if saying "earlier devices" will be a good solution in future perspective. Also, that's a general comment, but should this article be so comparison-focused? Wouldn't it be better to just say, e.g.: 

```suggestion
External interfaces can support high data rates (up to 40 times greater for USB and up to 8 times greater for external memory).
```

It'd keep it more technical and less marketing-focused.
And to have a proper comparison between devices, that brings an added value, probably a table would work much better.

> Compared to earlier devices, external interfaces have also been improved to support significantly higher data rates (up to 40 times greater for USB and up to 8 times greater for external memory).

Reviewer 2: Now that you mention, I did feel that in several places the tone was more marketing that technical documentation.

> This does not come at the expense of power consumption, as both active and sleep power consumption have been improved as well.

Reviewer: This suggestions follows the comment above
```suggestion
This does not come at the expense of power consumption due to significantly reduced active and sleep power consumption.
```

Highly integrated solution
==========================

The nRF54H20 SoC can help you simplify hardware designs by replacing multiple components, like an application MCU, an external flash, and a wireless SoC with one integrated SoC.
The nRF54H20 SoC's excellent energy efficiency enables smaller batteries to be utilized, further reducing both the design size and cost.

> It also provides a single easy-to-use development environment without having to use multiple tools from different vendors.

Reviewer: How about - It also comes with a single easy-to-use development environment (...)?

Best-in-class wireless support
==============================

The nRF54H20 SoC integrates a best-in-class 2.4 GHz radio that supports a wide range of wireless protocols.
It supports Bluetooth Low Energy, LE Audio, Direction Finding, Bluetooth mesh, Thread, Zigbee and Matter.

> This includes all Bluetooth 5.3 features and the preparation to support upcoming Bluetooth specification versions.

Reviewer: Maybe "readiness to support"?

Additionally, nRF54H20 has improved sensitivity and robustness against interference.

22 nm FD-SOI process node
=========================

Leveraging the latest advancements in semiconductor manufacturing, nRF54H20 is built using a 22 nm process from GlobalFoundries.
Smaller process nodes typically result in higher-leakage currents.
However, this is mitigated by leveraging Fully Depleted Silicon-on-Insulator (FD-SOI) process technology.
FD-SOI reduces the size of the transistor channel compared to bulk CMOS, resulting in lower leakage currents.

Additional security features
============================

The nRF54H20 SoC has been designed with security as a key feature.
The nRF54H20 SoC provides security functionality as services, implemented centrally in the Secure Domain.
It includes state-of-the-art security features and is designed to achieve PSA Certified Level 3.

> Physically separated centralized security has several advantages.
> It separates the most important security operations from the rest of the system.
> Because of this separation, there is a clear isolation layer where you interact with the secure services via well-defined APIs.
> It also simplifies the inclusion of tamper sensors and side-channel protection without significantly increasing the cost of the device.

Reviewer: How about turning it into bullet points?
```suggestion
Physically separated centralized security has several advantages:

* It separates the most important security operations from the rest of the system.
  Because of this separation, there is a clear isolation layer where you interact with the secure services via well-defined APIs.
* It simplifies the inclusion of tamper sensors and side-channel protection without significantly increasing the cost of the device.
```

Multi-core architecture
=======================

The nRF54H20 SoC is partitioned into functional blocks, called domains.
The domains containing the user-programmable main CPUs and associated functions are called cores.
Most memory and peripherals can be flexibly allocated to cores at compile time.
To make this possible, the memory and peripherals are located in a separate area called the Global Domain.
Security functions are centralized into the Secure Domain.

Asymmetric multiprocessing
==========================

> One of the key methods used to optimize the nRF54H20 SoC for very efficient processing is to include several CPUs and optimize them for different workloads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the key methods used to optimize the nRF54H20 SoC for very efficient processing is to include several CPUs that are optimized for different workloads.
```

> In the nRF54H20 SoC, there are two different types of CPUs: Arm Cortex-M33, and a RISC-V-compatible CPU designed by Nordic Semiconductor called VPR (pronounced “Viper”).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the nRF54H20 SoC, there are two different types of CPUs: Arm Cortex-M33 and :term:`VPR <VPR Core>` (pronounced "Viper").
VPR are RISC-V-compatible CPUs designed by Nordic Semiconductor.

```
Note empty line to create paragraph break.

> However, we also apply optimizations to each instance of each processor, so that CPUs are tailored to their range of tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each instance of each processor is also optimized so that the CPUs are tailored to their range of tasks.
```

> This way, you can freely select the CPU that is best suited to the various workloads that make up an application.

Reviewer: Line 77 and 80 essentially talk about the same thing.
```suggestion
```

> Each CPU runs its own instance of the operating system.
> There is no centralized scheduler that assigns threads to various cores.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each CPU runs its own instance of the operating system, and there is no centralized scheduler that assigns threads to various cores.
```

This means that you have a full control over which CPU is used for a given task.

System services
===============

One key feature of the nRF54H20 SoC is that a lot of functionality is provided as services, implemented by Nordic-provided firmware.
This means that you can access functionality through a software API rather than through a set of registers.
Using a firmware layer means that functionality can be more advanced and handled at a higher level of abstraction, which increases ease-of-use.

> Power management service

Reviewer 2: Should this be a subheading of System services?

========================

Rather than manually setting a power mode through a register or calling a sleep instruction, power management is performed through a service where the application describes the functionality it needs and how much latency it can accept.
Based on this information, the Power Management Service automatically handles the details such as: deciding how registers will be retained, which parts of the device are put into what mode, and what clock signals are running.

Security architecture
=====================

The nRF54H20 SoC security architecture is based on the conclusions from extensive threat modelling.

> nRF54H20 is designed to protect against logical attacks and firmware-oriented attacks, as well as physical security at the PCB or package level (for example, against voltage glitching and EMI attacks).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SoC is designed to protect against logical attacks and firmware-oriented attacks, as well as physical security at the PCB or package level (for example, against voltage glitching and EMI attacks).
```

However, robustness against physical die probing or alteration of the die itself is not provided by the design.
Security in software is implemented as a set of services, provided by the Secure Domain.
These services manage the following:

* Secure Boot
* Cryptographic operations
* Key management

> * Device Firmware Updates (DFU) through the Software Internet of Things (SUIT) procedure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Device Firmware Updates (DFU) through the Software Update for Internet of Things (SUIT) procedure
```

The main application and other parts of the system access security services through an API.

> This API is translated internally to messages sent to the Secure Domain through a mailbox-based interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This API is translated internally to requests that are sent to the Secure Domain through a mailbox-based interface.
```
Is the API translated, or are API calls translated?

> The security services handle these requests, utilizing hardware accelerators and other resources, and as security is centralized in the Secure Domain, keys can be kept inside this physical area and remain well-protected against attacks or breaches due to firmware exploits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The security services handle these requests, utilizing hardware accelerators and other resources.
Since security is centralized in the Secure Domain, keys can be kept inside this physical area and remain well-protected against attacks or breaches utilizing firmware exploits.
```

The nRF54H20 SoC also includes tamper sensors that can detect an attack in progress and take appropriate action.
The cryptographic accelerators have been hardened against side-channel attacks.

> CPUs overview and features
> ==========================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CPUs and related features
=========================
```
Makes it more like the other headings. Also agree with Kitty that this section could probably be higher.

The CPU cores in the nRF54H20 SoC are based on two types of CPU architectures:

> * Arm Cortex M33

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Arm Cortex-M33
```

* RISC-V (VPR cores)

> Arm Cortex M33

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Arm Cortex-M33
```

--------------

The Arm Cortex-M33 is a powerful yet power-efficient CPU developed by Arm.
It supports TrustZone, allowing secure and non-secure code to be separated and to have differentiated access to memory and peripherals.
In the nRF54H20 SoC, both Cortex-M33 instances are configured with a floating point unit, TrustZone, and DSP extensions enabled.
In addition to the CPU itself, each Arm Cortex-M33-based core includes also the following local features:

> * Local level-1 (L1) cache, split into separate caches for data and instructions, with 16 kB each[2].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Local level 1 (L1) cache, split into separate caches for data and instructions, with 16 kB each.
```

> * Local RAM, serving as Tightly Coupled Memory (TCM), accessible without any wait states or latency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Local RAM, serving as :term:`Tightly Coupled Memory (TCM)`, accessible without any wait states or latency.
```

> * A Memory Vector DMA (MVDMA) controller, which allows high-throughput DMA transfers between local and global memory.

Reviewer 2: Glossary has Memory-to-Memory Vector DMA. Same or different? If same, should probably be a term.

> * Two watch-dog timers (WDT), controlled by the secure and non-secure firmware, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Two :term:`watchdog timers (WDT) <Watchdog timer (WDT)>`, one controlled by the secure firmware and and the other by the non-secure firmware.
```

>   WDTs produce a local reset, affecting only the core and not the rest of the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The WDTs produce a local reset, affecting only the core and not the rest of the system.
```

> * An Interprocessor Communication Transceiver (IPCT) for communication with peripherals in other domains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* An :term:`Interprocessor Communication Transceiver (IPCT)` for communication with peripherals in other domains.
```

Cache memories
--------------

In the nRF54H20 SoC, each Arm Cortex-M33 core contains a local level 1 (L1) cache with separate data and instruction caches.
Their size is 16 kB each.

> These caches are 2-way set associative.
> There is also a global level 2 (L2) cache.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These caches are 2-way set associative.

There is also a global level 2 (L2) cache.
```

The main purpose of this cache is to accelerate accesses to slower global memories, such as MRAM and EXMIF.
The size of the L2 cache is 128 kB.

VPR core
--------

The VPR (pronounced “Viper”) is a small, efficient CPU developed by Nordic Semiconductor.
It is compatible with the RISC-V instruction set.
This means that industry-standard RISC-V development tools can be used.
It implements the following extensions:

* E: Integer instruction set with 16 registers
* M: Multiply and divide extension
* C: Compressed extension (compressed instructions)

The VPR implements the Machine mode CPU mode as well as the RISC-V CLIC specification for the interrupt controller.

> The VPR implementation has been optimized for low-power, real-time use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation has been optimized for low-power, real-time use cases.
```

> There are two user-accessible instances of VPRs in the nRF54H20 SoC: the Peripheral Processor (PPR, pronounced “Pepper”) and the Fast Lightweight Processor (FLPR, pronounced “Flipper”).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two user-accessible instances of VPRs in the nRF54H20 SoC: the :term:`Peripheral Processor (PPR, pronounced “Pepper”)` and the :term:`Fast Lightweight Processor (FLPR, pronounced “Flipper”)`.

```
Empty line to create paragraph break.

The PPR is located in the low-leakage portion of the Global Domain and is primarily intended to do the following:

* Handle peripherals in low-power states while the main processors are in Sleep mode.
* Coordinate peripherals.
* Implement low-level protocols for communicating with sensors and actuators.

The FLPR is located in the high-speed portion of the Global Domain and is primarily intended to do the following:

* Implement software-defined peripheral functions.
* Offload timing-critical tasks from the main processors.

Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling support
---------------------------------------------

> Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS) is a power management technique that allows adjusting the operating voltage and operating frequency of a CPU, depending on the workload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:term:`Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS)` is a power management technique that allows adjusting the operating voltage and operating frequency of a CPU, depending on the workload.
```

> This functionality was common in high-end processors but is now viable also for MCUs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This functionality is common in high-end processors but is now also viable for MCUs.
```

> In the nRF54H20 SoC, the Application Core is DVFS-enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the nRF54H20 SoC, the :term:`Application Core` is DVFS-enabled.
```

> If the maximum clock speed is not required, both the clock speed and voltage can be reduced, improving power efficiency.

Reviewer 3: For the bootloader/DFU section:
```
Supported bootloader and Device Firmware Update (DFU) procedures
****************************************************************

The nRF54H20 DK introduces new booting and DFU procedures: the Secure Domain (SecDom) and the Software Updates for Internet of Things (SUIT) procedure.

SecDom bootloader
=================

The nRF54H20 DK features a secure bootloader beginning with an immutable boot ROM that establishes a root-of-trust.
It initially verifies the Secure Domain (SecDom) firmware's signature.
Once verified, the SecDom, acting as the boot master, takes over to configure global resources, ensuring secure and efficient startup.
This process highlights the device's strong focus on security and effective resource management, crucial for reliable operations in sensitive applications.

For more information about the bootloader and overall booting procedure for the nRF54H20 DK, see the :ref:`ug_nrf54h20_architecture_boot` page.

SUIT DFU procedure
==================

The nRF54H20 DK supports advanced Device Firmware Update (DFU) procedures facilitated through the SUIT procedure (Nordic Semiconductor's implementation of the procedure).
SUIT employs a flexible, script-based system that allows for the customization of the installation and invocation processes.
The use of hierarchical manifest systems supports multiple CPU cores and images, providing robust management of firmware dependencies and secure, efficient updates.

The :ref:`SUIT manifests <ug_nrf54h20_suit_manifest_overview>` control every step of the DFU process: from payload fetching and installation, to validation and invocation procedures.
This setup ensures that updates are applied securely and reliably across all components of the device.
The manifests include detailed command sequences that manage the execution of updates, catering to complex multi-core architectures typical of the nRF54H20 DK.

For more information on working with SUIT for the nRF54H20 DK, refer to the :ref:`ug_nrf54h20_suit_dfu` page and its listed user guides.
For more detailed information about the SUIT DFU procedure, see the :ref:`ug_nrf54h20_suit_intro` page.

```
